This is the palace of thefearful king,
And this the regal seat:possess it, York;
For this is thine and notKing Henry's heirs'
Assist me, then, sweetWarwick, and I will;
We'll all assist you; hethat flies shall die.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk:
And when the king comes,offer him no violence,
Unless he seek to thrustyou out perforce.
Then leave me not, mylords; be resolute;
I mean to take possessionof my right.
Neither the king, nor hethat loves him best,
The proudest he that holdsup Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, ifWarwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet,root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard;claim the English crown.
(celebrating cheers)
(horns sound)
My lords, look where thesturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair ofstate: belike he means,
Back'd by the power ofWarwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crownand reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, heslew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; andyou both have vow'd revenge
On him, his sons, hisfavourites and his friends.
If I be not, heavens berevenged on me!
The hope thereof makesClifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this?let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns;I cannot brook it.
Be patient, gentle Earl ofWestmoreland.
Patience is for poltroons,such as he:
He durst not sit there,had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here inthe parliament
Let us assail the familyof York.
Well hast thou spoken,cousin: be it so.
Ah, know you not the cityfavours them,
And they have troops ofsoldiers at their beck?
But when the duke is slain,they'll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of thisfrom Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of theparliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns,words and threats
Shall be the war thatHenry means to use.
Thou factious Duke ofYork, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace andmercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame, come down: hemade thee Duke of York.
'Twas my inheritance, asthe earldom was.
Thy father was a traitorto the crown.
Exeter, thou art a traitorto the crown
In following this usurpingHenry.
Whom should he follow buthis natural king?
True, Clifford; and that'sRichard Duke of York.
And shall I stand, andthou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so:content thyself.
Be Duke of Lancaster; lethim be king.
He is both king and Dukeof Lancaster;
And that the Lord ofWestmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it.
You forget that we are thosewhich chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, andwith colours spread
March'd through the cityto the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I do rememberit to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou andthy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee andthese thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends,I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood werein my father's veins.
Urge it no more; lestthat, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, sucha messenger
As shall revenge his deathbefore I stir.
Poor Clifford! how I scornhis worthless threats!
Will you we show our titleto the crown?
If not, our swords shallplead it in the field.
What title hast thou,traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thouart, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, RogerMortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry theFifth,
Who made the Dauphin andthe French to stoop
And seized upon theirtowns and provinces.
Talk not of France, siththou hast lost it all.
The lord protector lostit, and not I:
When I was crown'd I wasbut nine months old.
You are old enough now, andyet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crownfrom the usurper's head.
Sweet father, do so; setit on your head.
Good father, as thoulovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and notstand cavilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets,and the king will fly.
Sons, peace!
Peace, thou! and give KingHenry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speakfirst: hear him, lords;
And be you silent andattentive too,
For he that interrupts himshall not live.
Plantagenet, why seeks thou todipose thee?
Are we not bothplantagenets by birth
and from two brotherslinearly decent?
Suppose by right and equity,thou be king.
Think'st thou that I willleave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire andmy father sat?
No: first shall warunpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours,often borne in France,
And now in England to ourheart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet.Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, andbetter far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thoushalt be king.
Henry the Fourth byconquest got the crown.
'Twas by rebellion againsthis king.
I know not what to say; mytitle's weak.--
Tell me, may not a kingadopt an heir?
What then?
An if he may, then am Ilawful king;
For Richard, in the viewof many lords,
Resign'd the crown toHenry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was,and I am his.
He rose against him, beinghis sovereign,
And made him to resign hiscrown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he didit unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twereprejudicial to his crown?
No; for he could not soresign his crown
But that the next heirshould succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Dukeof Exeter?
His is the right, andtherefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my lords,and answer not?
My conscience tells me heis lawful king.
All will revolt from me,and turn to him.
King Henry, be thy titleright or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows tofight in thy defence:
May that ground gape andswallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to himthat slew my father!
O Clifford, how thy wordsrevive my heart!
Henry of Lancaster, resignthy crown.
Do right unto thisprincely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the housewith armed men,
And over the chair ofstate, where now he sits,
Write up his title withusurping blood.
(drums sound)
My Lord of Warwick, hearme but one word:
Let me for this mylife-time reign as king.
Confirm the crown to meand to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign inquiet while thou livest.
Convey the soldiers hence,and then I will.
Captain: Conduct them into thefields.
Away!
I am content: RichardPlantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after mydecease.
What wrong is this untothe prince your son!
What good is this toEngland and himself!
Base, fearful anddespairing Henry!
How hast thou injured boththyself and us!
I cannot stay to hearthese articles.
Nor I.
Come, cousin, let us tellthe queen these news.
Farewell, faint-heartedand degenerate king,
In whose cold blood nospark of honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto thehouse of York,
And die in bands for thisunmanly deed!
In dreadful war mayst thoube overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'dand despised!
Turn this way, Henry, andregard them not.
They seek revenge andtherefore will not yield.
Ah, Exeter!
Why should you sigh, mylord?
Not for myself, LordWarwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shalldisinherit.
But be it as it may:
I here entail The crown to theeand to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that herethou take thine oath
To cease this civil war,and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy kingand sovereign,
And neither by treason norhostility
To seek to put me down andreign thyself.
This oath I willingly takeand will perform.
Long live the King!
(crowd chants) Long live theKing!
And long live thou andthese thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster arereconciled.
Accursed be he that seeksto make them foes!
(horn sounds)
Farewell, my graciouslord; I'll take my leave.
But I'll to Wakefield to mycastle.
And I'll keep London withmy soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with myfollowers.
And I, with grief andsorrow, to the court.
Here comes the queen, whoselooks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.
Exeter, so will I.
Nay, go not from me; Iwill follow thee.
Be patient, gentle queen,and I will stay.
Who can be patient in suchextremes?
Ah, wretched man! would Ihad died a maid
And never seen thee, neverborne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved sounnatural a father
Hath he deserved to losehis birthright thus?
Father, you cannotdisinherit me:
If you be king, why shouldnot I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret;pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick andthe duke enforced me.
Enforced thee! art thouking, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak.Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself,thy son and me;
And given unto the houseof York such head
As thou shalt reign but bytheir sufferance.
To entail him and hisheirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to makethy sepulchre
And creep into it farbefore thy time?
Warwick is chancellor. Salisburylord of Calais;
And the duke is made protectorof the realm;
And yet shalt thou besafe? such safety finds
The trembling lambenvironed with wolves.
Had I been there, which ama silly woman,
The soldiers should havetoss'd me on their pikes
Before I would havegranted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thylife before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, Ihere divorce myself
Both from thy table,Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act ofparliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son isdisinherited.
The northern lords thathave forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if oncethey see them spread;
And spread they shall be,to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of thehouse of York.
Thus do I leave thee.Come, son, let's away;
Our army is ready; come,we'll after them.
Stay, gentle Margaret, andhear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too muchalready: get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thouwilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murder'd by hisenemies.
When I return with victoryfrom the field
I'll see your grace: tillthen I'll follow her.
Come, son, away; we maynot linger thus.
Poor queen! how love to meand to her son
Hath made her break outinto terms of rage!
Revenged may she be onthat hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit,winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, andlike an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of meand of my son!
The loss of those threelords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them andentreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall bethe messenger.
And I, I hope, shallreconcile them all.
Brother, though I beyoungest, give me leave.
No, I can better play theorator.
But I have reasons strongand forcible.
Why, how now, sons! At astrife?
What is your quarrel? howbegan it first?
No quarrel, but a slightcontention.
About what?
About that which concernsyour grace and us;
The crown of England,father, which is yours.
Mine boy? not till KingHenry be dead.
Your right depends not onhis life or death.
Now you are heir,therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house ofLancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you,father, in the end.
I took an oath that heshould quietly reign.
But for a kingdom any oathmay be broken:
I would break a thousandoaths to reign one year.
No; God forbid your graceshould be forsworn.
I shall be, if I claim byopen war.
I'll prove the contrary,if you'll hear me speak.
Thou canst not, son; it isimpossible.
An oath is of no moment,being not took
Before a true and lawfulmagistrate,
That hath authority overhim that swears:
Henry had none, but didusurp the place;
Then, seeing 'twas he thatmade you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, isvain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And,father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is towear a crown;
Within whose circuit isElysium
And all that poets feignof bliss and joy.
Why do we linger thus? Icannot rest
Until the white rose thatI wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm bloodof Henry's heart.
Richard, enough; I will beking, or die.
Cousin, thou shalt toLondon presently,
And whet on Warwick tothis enterprise.
Richard and George, you shalt toNorfolk straight,
And tell him privily ofour intent.
You Edward, shall to EdmundBrooke, Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmenwill willingly rise:
In them I trust; for theyare soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal,full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd,what resteth more,
But that I seek occasionhow to rise,
And yet the king not privyto my drift,
Nor any of the house ofLancaster?
(horn sounds)
But, stay: what news? Whycomest thou in such post?
The queen with all thenorthern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege youin your castle:
She is hard by with twentythousand men;
And therefore fortify yourhold, my lord.
Ay, with my sword.
What! think'st thouthat we fear them?
Edward and Richard, youshall stay with me;(bell rings)
Haste you to London cousinMontague:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham,and the rest,
Whom we have leftprotectors of the king,
With powerful policystrengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henrynor his oaths.
Cousin, I go; I'll winthem, fear it not:
Sir John and Sir HughMortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal ina happy hour;
The army of the queen meanto besiege us.
She shall not need; we'llmeet her in the field.
What, with five thousandmen?
Ay, with five hundred,father, for a need:
A woman's general; whatshould we fear?
I hear their drums: let'sset our men in order,
And issue forth and bidthem battle straight.
Five men to twenty! thoughthe odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of ourvictory.
Many a battle have I wonin France,
When as the enemy hathbeen ten to one:
Why should I not now havethe like success?
(bells ring, drums beat)
Ah, whither shall I fly to'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look wherebloody Clifford comes!
Chaplain, away! thypriesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of thisaccursed duke,
Whose father slew myfather, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bearhim company.
Soldiers, away with him!
Ah, Clifford, murder notthis innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both ofGod and man!
How now! is he dead already?
Or is it fear that makes himclose his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the pent-up liono'er the wretch
That trembles under hisdevouring paws;
Sweet Clifford, hear mespeak before I die.
I am too mean a subjectfor thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men,and let me live.
In vain thouspeak'st, poor boy;
my father's blood hathstopp'd the passage
where thy words should enter.
Then let my father's bloodopen it again:
He is a man, and,Clifford, cope with him.
Had thy brethren here,their lives and thine
Were not revengesufficient for me;
No, if I digg'd up thyforefathers' graves
And hung their rottencoffins up in chains,
It could not slake mineire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of thehouse of York
Is as a fury to torment mysoul;
And till I root out theiraccursed line
And leave not one alive, Ilive in hell.
Therefore--
O, let me pray before Itake my death!
To thee I pray; sweetClifford, pity me!
Such pity as my rapier'spoint affords.
I never did thee harm: whywilt thou slay me?
Thy father hath.
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for hissake pity me,
Thy father slew my father;therefore, die.
Di faciant laudis summasit ista tuae!
Plantagenet! I come,Plantagenet!
And this thy son's bloodcleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon,till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, domake me wipe off both.
The army of the queen hathgot the field:
My uncles both are slainin rescuing me;
And all my followers tothe eager foe
Turn back and fly, likeships before the wind
Or lambs pursued byhunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows whathath bechanced them:
But this I know, they havedemean'd themselves
Like men born to renown bylife or death.
Three times did Richardmake a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage,father! fight it out!'
And full as oft cameEdward to my side,
With purple falchion,painted to the hilt
In blood of those that hadencounter'd him:
And when the hardiestwarriors did retire,
and George cried 'Charge! andgive no foot of ground!'
Edward.  'A crown, orelse a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthlysepulchre!'
With this, we chargedagain: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I haveseen a swan
With bootless labour swimagainst the tide
And spend her strengthwith over-matching waves.
(trumpets sound)
Ah, hark! the fatalfollowers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannotfly their fury:
And were I strong, I wouldnot shun their fury:
The sands are number'dthat make up my life;
Here must I stay, and heremy life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford,rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchlessfury to more rage:
I am your butt, and Iabide your shot.
Yield to our mercy, proudPlantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as hisruthless arm,
With downright payment,show'd unto my father.
My ashes, like the phoenix,may bring forth
A bird that will revengeupon you all:
And in that hope I throwmine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you canafflict me with.
Why come you not? what!multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when theycan fly no further;
So doves do peck thefalcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, allhopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives'gainst the officers.
O Clifford, but bethinkthee once again,
And in thy thoughto'er-run my former time;
And, if though canst forblushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, thatslanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made theefaint and fly ere this!
I will not bandy with theeword for word,
But buckle with theeblows, twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford!for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile thetraitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speakthou, Northumberland.
Hold, Clifford! do nothonour him so much
To prick thy finger,though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, whena cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his handbetween his teeth,
When he might spurn himwith his foot away?
It is war's prize to takeall vantages;
And ten to one is noimpeach of valour.
Ay, ay, so strives thewoodcock with the gin.
So doth the cony strugglein the net.
So triumph thieves upontheir conquer'd booty;
So true men yield, withrobbers so o'ermatch'd.
What would your grace havedone unto him now?
Brave warriors, Cliffordand Northumberland,
Come, make him stand uponthis molehill here,
That raught at mountainswith outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadowwith his hand.
(laughing)
What! was it you thatwould be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd inour parliament,
And made a preachment ofyour high descent?
Where are your mess ofsons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and thelusty George?
And where's that valiantcrook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that withhis grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dadin mutinies?
Or, with the rest, whereis your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd thisnapkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford,with his rapier's point,
Made issue from thebosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes canwater for his death,
I give thee this to drythy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that Ihate thee deadly,
I should lament thymiserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to makeme merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heartso parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fallfor Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man?thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad,do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret,that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, Isee, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unlesshe wears a crown.
A crown for York! and,lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilstI do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now lookshe like a king!
Ay, this is he that tookKing Henry's chair,
And this is he was hisadopted heir.
But how is it that greatPlantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, andbroke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, youshould not be king
Till our King Henry hadshook hands with death.
And will you pale yourhead in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of thediadem,
Now in his life, againstyour holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too toounpardonable!
Off with the crown, andwith the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe,take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for myfather's sake.
Nay, stay; lets hear theorisons he makes.
She-wolf of France, butworse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisonsthan the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it inthy sex
To triumph, like anAmazonian trull,
Upon their woes whomfortune captivates!
But that thy face is,vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use ofevil deeds,
I would assay, proudqueen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thoucamest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shamethee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the typeof King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils andJerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as anEnglish yeoman.
Hath that poor monarchtaught thee to insult?
'Tis beauty that doth oftmake women proud;
But, God he knows, thyshare thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth makethem most admired;
The contrary doth makethee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makesthem seem divine;
The want thereof makesthee abominable:
O tiger's heart wrapt in awoman's hide!
How couldst thou drain thelife-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe hiseyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear awoman's face?
Women are soft, mild,pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate,flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why,now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why,now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows upincessant showers,
And when the rage allays,the rain begins.
These tears are my sweetRutland's obsequies:
And every drop criesvengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford,and thee, false Frenchwoman.
Beshrew me, but hispassion moves me so
That hardly can I chequemy eyes from tears.
That face of his thehungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, wouldnot have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman,more inexorable,
O, ten times more, thantigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, ahapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst inblood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do washthe blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, andgo boast of this:
And if thou tell'st theheavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearerswill shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shedfast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was apiteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and,with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need suchcomfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy toocruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford,take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, myblood upon your heads!
Had he been slaughter-manto all my kin,
I should not for my lifebut weep with him.
To see how inly sorrowgripes his soul.
What, weeping-ripe, myLord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wronghe did us all,
And that will quickly drythy melting tears.
Here's for my oath, here'sfor my father's death.
And here's to right ourgentle-hearted king.
Open Thy gate of mercy,gracious God!
My soul flies through thesewounds to seek out Thee.
Off with his head, and setit on York gates;
That York may overlook thetown of York.